README.md, before:

# Behavioral Economic (be) Easy (ez) Demand
An R package containing commonly used functions for analyzing behavioral economic demand curve data.

### Installation
----------------
Install and load the devtools package. Then, use install_github to install the package.

```r
install.packages("devtools")
install.packages("digest")

library(devtools)

install_github("brentkaplan/beezdemand")

library(beezdemand)
```

#### Note About Use
Currently, this version (0.0.6) is under development. You are free to use it,
but be aware that there might be bugs present.
If you find issues or would like to contribute, please contact me at <bkaplan4@ku.edu>.

### Sample Implementation
-------------------------

#### Example dataset provided
Example dataset of responses on an Alcohol Purchase Task. Participants
reported the number of alcoholic drinks (y) they would be willing to
purchase and consume at various prices (x; USD). Note the
long format.

```r
>apt[c(1:8, 17:24), ]
id   x  y
1  19 0.0 10
2  19 0.5 10
3  19 1.0 10
4  19 1.5  8
5  19 2.0  8
6  19 2.5  8
7  19 3.0  7
8  19 4.0  7
17 30 0.0  3
18 30 0.5  3
19 30 1.0  3
20 30 1.5  3
21 30 2.0  2
22 30 2.5  2
23 30 3.0  2
24 30 4.0  2
```

#### Obtain descriptive summary
Descriptive values of responses at each price. Includes mean, standard
deviation, proportion of zeros, and numer of NAs.

```r
> GetDescriptives(apt)
	         0  0.5    1  1.5    2  2.5    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10
Mean      6.80 6.80 6.50 6.10 5.30 5.20 4.80 4.30 3.90 3.50 3.30 2.60 2.40 2.20
SD        2.62 2.62 2.27 1.91 1.89 1.87 1.48 1.57 1.45 1.43 1.34 1.51 1.58 1.32
PropZeros 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.10 0.10
NAs       0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
            15   20
Mean      1.10 0.80
SD        1.37 1.14
PropZeros 0.50 0.60
NAs       0.00 0.00
```

#### Apply algorithm for identifying unsystematic responses
Examine consistency of demand data using Stein et al.'s (2015) alogrithm for identifying unsystematic
responses. Default values shown.


```r
> head(CheckUnsystematic(apt, deltaq = 0.025, bounce = 0.1, reversals = 0, ncons0 = 2), 3)
  Participant TotalPass DeltaQ DeltaQPass Bounce BouncePass Reversals
1          19         3 0.2112       Pass      0       Pass         0
2          30         3 0.1437       Pass      0       Pass         0
3          38         3 0.7885       Pass      0       Pass         0
  ReversalsPass NumPosValues
1          Pass           16
2          Pass           16
3          Pass           14
```

#### Analyze demand data using either Exponential/Exponentiated models
Results of the analysis return both empirical and derived measures for
use in additional analyses and model specification.

```r
> head(FitCurves(apt, "hs"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation        Q0 K        R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15       hs 10.492736 1 0.9643380
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20       hs  2.942614 1 0.7934822
3          38   4  15  10    21     7       hs  4.525925 1 0.8656883
        Alpha      Q0se      Alphase  N      AbsSS      SdRes    Q0Low
1 0.004856258 0.4312016 0.0002574193 16 0.02028108 0.03806112 9.567901
2 0.014057972 0.2531714 0.0018292289 16 0.09724906 0.08334484 2.399616
3 0.009120746 0.2373820 0.0009315781 14 0.02601971 0.04656511 4.008714
     Q0High    AlphaLow   AlphaHigh        EV    Omaxd    Pmaxd     Notes
1 11.417572 0.004304148 0.005408367 2.0591989 45.63181 14.38512 converged
2  3.485613 0.010134666 0.017981278 0.7113402 15.76329 17.71936 converged
3  5.043136 0.007091012 0.011150481 1.0964015 24.29624 17.75686 converged

> head(FitCurves(apt, "koff"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation        Q0 K        R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15     koff 10.219980 1 0.9636911
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20     koff  3.025350 1 0.8188253
3          38   4  15  10    21     7     koff  4.599041 1 0.8182557
        Alpha      Q0se      Alphase  N    AbsSS     SdRes    Q0Low    Q0High
1 0.004501826 0.2673350 0.0002894209 16 3.186106 0.4770524 9.646603 10.793356
2 0.014498545 0.1780691 0.0021436221 16 1.449398 0.3217583 2.643430  3.407271
3 0.010588272 0.3414723 0.0018843340 16 5.043406 0.6002027 3.866656  5.331426
     AlphaLow   AlphaHigh        EV    Omaxd    Pmaxd     Notes
1 0.003881080 0.005122573 2.2213207 49.22443 15.93181 converged
2 0.009900933 0.019096158 0.6897244 15.28428 16.71106 converged
3 0.006546778 0.014629766 0.9444412 20.92880 15.05260 converged
```

#### Share k globally while fitting other parameters locally
Provides the ability to share k globally (across all participants)
while estimating Q<sub>0</sub> and alpha locally. 

```r
> head(FitCurves(apt, "hs", k = "share"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation     Q0d SharedK      R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15       hs 10.0146  3.3183 0.98210
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20       hs  2.7663  3.3183 0.76418
3          38   4  15  10    21     7       hs  4.4858  3.3183 0.88031
      Alpha    Q0se    Alphase  N    AbsSS    SdRes  Q0Low  Q0High  AlphaLow
1 0.0011616 0.24291 3.0813e-05 16 0.010182 0.026968 9.4936 10.5356 0.0010955
2 0.0033331 0.21928 3.7389e-04 16 0.111049 0.089062 2.2960  3.2366 0.0025312
3 0.0024580 0.20750 1.9633e-04 14 0.023186 0.043957 4.0337  4.9379 0.0020302
  AlphaHigh     EVd  Omaxd  Pmaxd     Notes
1 0.0012277 1.42418 44.552 13.161 converged
2 0.0041350 0.49633 15.526 16.604 converged
3 0.0028858 0.67304 21.054 13.885 converged
```

#### See function details
To learn more about a function and what arguments it takes, type "?"
in front of the function name.

```r
> ?CheckUnsystematic
CheckUnsystematic          package:beezdemand          R Documentation

Systematic Purchase Task Data Checker

Description:

     Applies Stein, Koffarnus, Snider, Quisenberry, & Bickel's (2015)
     criteria for identification of nonsystematic purchase task data.
     ...
```

### Acknowledgments
-------------------

- Derek D. Reed, Applied Behavioral Economics Laboratory
(www.behavioraleconlab.com)

- Paul E. Johnson, Center for Research Methods and Data Analysis, University of Kansas
(www.crmda.ku.edu)

- Michael Amlung, Cognitive Neuroscience of Addictions Laboratory
(www.cnalab.weebly.com)

- Peter G. Roma, Institutes for Behavior Resources, Inc.
(www.ibrinc.org)

- Steven R. Hursh, Institutes for Behavior Resources, Inc.
(www.ibrinc.org)

- Shawn P. Gilroy, (<shawn.gilroy@temple.edu>; [GitHub](https://github.com/miyamot0))

### Recommended Readings
------------------------

- Reed, D. D., Niileksela, C. R., & Kaplan, B. A. (2013). Behavioral economics: A tutorial for behavior analysts in practice. *Behavior Analysis in Practice, 6* (1), 34–54.

- Reed, D. D., Kaplan, B. A., & Becirevic, A. (2015). Basic research on the behavioral economics of reinforcer value. In *Autism Service Delivery* (pp. 279-306). Springer New York.

- Hursh, S. R., & Silberberg, A. (2008). Economic demand and essential value. *Psychological Review, 115* (1), 186-198.

- Koffarnus, M. N., Franck, C. T., Stein, J. S., & Bickel, W. K. (2015). A modified exponential behavioral economic demand model to better describe consumption data. *Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 23* (6), 504-512.

- Stein, J. S., Koffarnus, M. N., Snider, S. E., Quisenberry, A. J., & Bickel, W. K. (2015). Identification and management of nonsystematic purchase task data: Toward best practice. *Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology*

### Questions, Suggestions, and Contributions
---------------------------------------------

Have a question? Have a suggestion for a feature? Would you like to contribute? Email me at <bkaplan4@ku.edu>.

### License
-----------

GPL-Version 2

Commit message:

Add vignette and update README

README.md, after:

# Behavioral Economic (be) Easy (ez) Demand
An R package containing commonly used functions for analyzing behavioral economic demand curve data.

### Installation
----------------
Install and load the devtools package. Then, use install_github to
install the package and associated vignette.

```r
install.packages("devtools")
install.packages("digest")

devtools::install_github("brentkaplan/beezdemand", build_vignettes = TRUE)

library(beezdemand)
```

#### Note About Use
Currently, this version (0.0.6) is under development. You are free to use it,
but be aware that there might be bugs present.
If you find issues or would like to contribute, please contact me at <bkaplan4@ku.edu>.

### Sample Implementation
-------------------------

#### Example dataset provided
Example dataset of responses on an Alcohol Purchase Task. Participants (id)
reported the number of alcoholic drinks (y) they would be willing to
purchase and consume at various prices (x; USD). Note the
long format.

```r
>apt[c(1:8, 17:24), ]
id   x  y
1  19 0.0 10
2  19 0.5 10
3  19 1.0 10
4  19 1.5  8
5  19 2.0  8
6  19 2.5  8
7  19 3.0  7
8  19 4.0  7
17 30 0.0  3
18 30 0.5  3
19 30 1.0  3
20 30 1.5  3
21 30 2.0  2
22 30 2.5  2
23 30 3.0  2
24 30 4.0  2
```

#### Obtain descriptive summary
Descriptive values of responses at each price. Includes mean, standard
deviation, proportion of zeros, and numer of NAs.

```r
> GetDescriptives(apt)
	         0  0.5    1  1.5    2  2.5    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10
Mean      6.80 6.80 6.50 6.10 5.30 5.20 4.80 4.30 3.90 3.50 3.30 2.60 2.40 2.20
SD        2.62 2.62 2.27 1.91 1.89 1.87 1.48 1.57 1.45 1.43 1.34 1.51 1.58 1.32
PropZeros 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.10 0.10
NAs       0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
            15   20
Mean      1.10 0.80
SD        1.37 1.14
PropZeros 0.50 0.60
NAs       0.00 0.00
```

#### Apply algorithm for identifying unsystematic responses
Examine consistency of demand data using Stein et al.'s (2015) alogrithm for identifying unsystematic
responses. Default values shown.


```r
> head(CheckUnsystematic(apt, deltaq = 0.025, bounce = 0.1, reversals = 0, ncons0 = 2), 3)
  Participant TotalPass DeltaQ DeltaQPass Bounce BouncePass Reversals
1          19         3 0.2112       Pass      0       Pass         0
2          30         3 0.1437       Pass      0       Pass         0
3          38         3 0.7885       Pass      0       Pass         0
  ReversalsPass NumPosValues
1          Pass           16
2          Pass           16
3          Pass           14
```

#### Analyze demand data using either Exponential/Exponentiated models
Results of the analysis return both empirical and derived measures for
use in additional analyses and model specification.

```r
> head(FitCurves(apt, "hs"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation        Q0 K        R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15       hs 10.492736 1 0.9643380
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20       hs  2.942614 1 0.7934822
3          38   4  15  10    21     7       hs  4.525925 1 0.8656883
        Alpha      Q0se      Alphase  N      AbsSS      SdRes    Q0Low
1 0.004856258 0.4312016 0.0002574193 16 0.02028108 0.03806112 9.567901
2 0.014057972 0.2531714 0.0018292289 16 0.09724906 0.08334484 2.399616
3 0.009120746 0.2373820 0.0009315781 14 0.02601971 0.04656511 4.008714
     Q0High    AlphaLow   AlphaHigh        EV    Omaxd    Pmaxd     Notes
1 11.417572 0.004304148 0.005408367 2.0591989 45.63181 14.38512 converged
2  3.485613 0.010134666 0.017981278 0.7113402 15.76329 17.71936 converged
3  5.043136 0.007091012 0.011150481 1.0964015 24.29624 17.75686 converged

> head(FitCurves(apt, "koff"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation        Q0 K        R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15     koff 10.219980 1 0.9636911
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20     koff  3.025350 1 0.8188253
3          38   4  15  10    21     7     koff  4.599041 1 0.8182557
        Alpha      Q0se      Alphase  N    AbsSS     SdRes    Q0Low    Q0High
1 0.004501826 0.2673350 0.0002894209 16 3.186106 0.4770524 9.646603 10.793356
2 0.014498545 0.1780691 0.0021436221 16 1.449398 0.3217583 2.643430  3.407271
3 0.010588272 0.3414723 0.0018843340 16 5.043406 0.6002027 3.866656  5.331426
     AlphaLow   AlphaHigh        EV    Omaxd    Pmaxd     Notes
1 0.003881080 0.005122573 2.2213207 49.22443 15.93181 converged
2 0.009900933 0.019096158 0.6897244 15.28428 16.71106 converged
3 0.006546778 0.014629766 0.9444412 20.92880 15.05260 converged
```

#### Share k globally while fitting other parameters locally
Provides the ability to share k globally (across all participants)
while estimating Q<sub>0</sub> and alpha locally.

```r
> head(FitCurves(apt, "hs", k = "share"), 3)
  Participant Q0e BP0 BP1 Omaxe Pmaxe Equation     Q0d SharedK      R2
1          19  10  NA  20    45    15       hs 10.0146  3.3183 0.98210
2          30   3  NA  20    20    20       hs  2.7663  3.3183 0.76418
3          38   4  15  10    21     7       hs  4.4858  3.3183 0.88031
      Alpha    Q0se    Alphase  N    AbsSS    SdRes  Q0Low  Q0High  AlphaLow
1 0.0011616 0.24291 3.0813e-05 16 0.010182 0.026968 9.4936 10.5356 0.0010955
2 0.0033331 0.21928 3.7389e-04 16 0.111049 0.089062 2.2960  3.2366 0.0025312
3 0.0024580 0.20750 1.9633e-04 14 0.023186 0.043957 4.0337  4.9379 0.0020302
  AlphaHigh     EVd  Omaxd  Pmaxd     Notes
1 0.0012277 1.42418 44.552 13.161 converged
2 0.0041350 0.49633 15.526 16.604 converged
3 0.0028858 0.67304 21.054 13.885 converged
```

#### See function details
To learn more about a function and what arguments it takes, type "?"
in front of the function name.

```r
> ?CheckUnsystematic
CheckUnsystematic          package:beezdemand          R Documentation

Systematic Purchase Task Data Checker

Description:

     Applies Stein, Koffarnus, Snider, Quisenberry, & Bickel's (2015)
     criteria for identification of nonsystematic purchase task data.
     ...
```

### Acknowledgments
-------------------

- Derek D. Reed, Applied Behavioral Economics Laboratory
(www.behavioraleconlab.com)

- Paul E. Johnson, Center for Research Methods and Data Analysis, University of Kansas
(www.crmda.ku.edu)

- Michael Amlung, Cognitive Neuroscience of Addictions Laboratory
(www.cnalab.weebly.com)

- Peter G. Roma, Institutes for Behavior Resources, Inc.
(www.ibrinc.org)

- Steven R. Hursh, Institutes for Behavior Resources, Inc.
(www.ibrinc.org)

- Shawn P. Gilroy, [GitHub](https://github.com/miyamot0)

### Recommended Readings
------------------------

- Reed, D. D., Niileksela, C. R., & Kaplan, B. A. (2013). Behavioral economics: A tutorial for behavior analysts in practice. *Behavior Analysis in Practice, 6* (1), 34–54.

- Reed, D. D., Kaplan, B. A., & Becirevic, A. (2015). Basic research on the behavioral economics of reinforcer value. In *Autism Service Delivery* (pp. 279-306). Springer New York.

- Hursh, S. R., & Silberberg, A. (2008). Economic demand and essential value. *Psychological Review, 115* (1), 186-198.

- Koffarnus, M. N., Franck, C. T., Stein, J. S., & Bickel, W. K. (2015). A modified exponential behavioral economic demand model to better describe consumption data. *Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 23* (6), 504-512.

- Stein, J. S., Koffarnus, M. N., Snider, S. E., Quisenberry, A. J., & Bickel, W. K. (2015). Identification and management of nonsystematic purchase task data: Toward best practice. *Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology*

### Questions, Suggestions, and Contributions
---------------------------------------------

Have a question? Have a suggestion for a feature? Would you like to contribute? Email me at <bkaplan4@ku.edu>.

### License
-----------

GPL-Version 2
